---
title: "Part III: Embedding Your True North"
summary:
  "In the final installment of 'Decoding Rohail,' we explore how to move from
  identifying core values to living them."
categories: ["musings"]

tags: ["self-reflection", "personal growth", "life lessons", "core values"]
toc: true
series: ["Decoding Rohail"]
series_part: 3
authors:
  - admin
url: "/personal-values-part-iii/"
date: 2023-10-31T13:26:24+01:00
draft: true
---

When I first created this website, my biggest goal was to create series
articles: Write mostly technical content that needed exploring over a series of
posts. This desire sprung from the large number of posts I've read online that
would introduce a topic at an introductory level and leave it at that.
Oftentimes, I came across these articles in the hopes of finding some
explanation about an intermediate concept. The number of resources on such
matters quickly dry out. Every once in a while, I've found authors who took a
more series oriented approach. I've benefitted immensely from such series, for
example, while making this website. Hugo didn't ship with a very natural way to
create series blog posts and I had to put together something for myself. Adding
this functionality delayed my launch ( publishing my fist article) far longer
than I care to admit (ahem, 6 months).

Why say this all anyway? Have we gone off topic when this article was about how
to embed your prioritized values in your life? Well, yes and no. The short
answer is, I wish there was a silver bullet I could share with you for achieving
our set objective. I certainly wish it was possible to be described within a
thousand word article. But there doesn't seem to be one. I delayed & hesitated
to write this article hoping for an epiphany I could share with you - but I have
to disappoint you. Yet, all hope is not lost. I hesitated to write for a few
different reasons.. The first reason, primarily, had to do with the fact that
having recently become a father , frankly this was not my biggest priority.
Secondly, I had pushed my "creative writing" into a corner. Instead of letting
my inspiration to write drive me to write what I was most mentally preoccupied
with at the time, I would feel like completing the series was a chore.

Things always come in three's don't they? This last point prevented me from
writing more & eventually I broke through it with the article (paste link here)
& here I revisited my motivations for even putting this blog together. There's
more to say about this but let's move on to number three: I was still figuring
it out myself. Through this article, I'd like to share some of my learnings on
trying to walk the talk.

Post Covid has been a time of real introspection for me. Embedding your values
in your day to day life has some ongoing pre-requisites. It's no magic trick,
nor a one time fix. It's a process, which will be personal to you & which would
evolve much as you would evolve as a person. Wait a minute though-if we're
evolving as a person, then are our values also something that need to be
revisited? If our reference, the values & our process to embed them, are both
changing, then how do we make any sense of it all. In reality, while this
situation may seem plausible, in my experience, you do not need to revisit your
values every full moon cycle. You can, if you want. However, if you earnestly
went through the process of defining them the first time, I'd leave it at that.
This is because values in themselves have no meaning. They are only words. It's
your actions, what they mean to you and how you decide to live them that brings
those words to life. At a given point in time, you shortlisted "values" from a
list of 100. You made tradeoffs and assessed how you saw yourself. For example,
loyalty, strong & patient. If you had to choose one of these, and I presume
everyone would choose differently, can the choice of these words really change
who we are? Does choosing strong mean loyalty is any less important to me? That
I think patience is only for idiots? Of course not. What's important here is to
take note of the mental process which led you to choose one value over another.
Making the choice is critical to reduce the noise and to have a sense of
direction. The tool we've just achieved will help guide us when we're in need of
direction. Remember writing reminders on the palm of your hand for something
you're likely to forget?

That value you chose goes in the palm of your hand. Anytime you hesitate & feel
lost you can revisit the choice you made to be a certain version of yourself you
had envisioned at a time of clarity. One last thing I'll add here to reiterate
why it's not so important to get too attached to the value itself is that your
interpretation of the value will keep changing as you move through life.
Strength may mean something completely different to a youth in the prime of
their life and an elder with many years of wisdom behind them. Your attachment
to the word keeps deepening as you keep revisiting it, letting the words sink
deeper & deeper into the palms of your hand.

We've discussed choosing values & committing to them but we haven't yet
discussed the crucial ingredient needed to make any of this work. Because this
is a process one needs to commit to, more than anything else, you need "space"
to be able to do this. I'm talking about mental space where you can look inside
yourself; be willing to make some decisions about who you will aspire to be. It
is critical that you understand and appreciate that these are choices YOU are
making about yourself and that these choices are more important than many other
choices we make in our day to day life. These are choices where we cannot let
anyone else's opinions colour our own. This is your inner world. This will
literally be the lens you use to view the world around you. Therefore, we must
learn to create space in our life on an ongoing basis where we can come to get
to know know ourselves, be gracious for who are, kind for who we are unable to
do yet and understand that much like how the outside world can impact our inner
being, our inner state can have a massive impact on our outside world.

I thought it'd be much easier than this - but it can't be rushed can it

- [The Surrender Experiment](https://www.amazon.com/Surrender-Experiment-Journey-Lifes-Perfection-ebook/dp/B00NDTUDOS/ref=sr_1_1?crid=2OFNLINWYWBIC&keywords=the+surrender+experiment+by+michael+singer&qid=1698135330&s=digital-text&sprefix=Surrender+Experiment+%2Cdigital-text%2C140&sr=1-1)

Why remind

- [The Untethered Soul](https://www.amazon.com/Untethered-Soul-Journey-Beyond-Yourself-ebook/dp/B003TU29WA/ref=sr_1_1?crid=1BBH1F4AW95S6&keywords=Untethered+Soul&qid=1698135346&s=digital-text&sprefix=untethered+soul%2Cdigital-text%2C134&sr=1-1)

Knowing your why

- [The Artist's Way](https://www.amazon.com.be/-/en/Julia-Cameron/dp/1788164296/ref=asc_df_1788164296/?tag=begogshpadde-21&linkCode=df0&hvadid=633392667541&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=16438304293944555379&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=1001006&hvtargid=pla-920673948416&psc=1)

and Having the faith to continue

- [Effortless Mastery](https://www.amazon.com/Effortless-Mastery-Liberating-Musician-Within-ebook/dp/B005OUHOLY/ref=sr_1_1?crid=M330Y58Q9VA4&keywords=Effortless+Mastery&qid=1698135274&s=digital-text&sprefix=effortless+mastery%2Cdigital-text%2C128&sr=1-1)

How to remember: Memory palace

- [The Memory Palace](https://www.amazon.com/Memory-Palace-Anything-Everything-Shakespeare-ebook/dp/B007V3FLTE)
